---
title: Reflecting on Advent of Code 2021
date: 2021-12-25
author: Stephen Nicholas Swatman
---

I love [Advent of Code](https://adventofcode.com/). Whether you're a veteran
programmer or new to computing, I believe there is something -- learning, fun,
or otherwise -- to gain from doing Advent of Code. As an added benefit, there's
always a fun storyline to the whole ordeal. Personally, I've done Advent of
Code for three years (2019, 2020, and 2021). Every time I have participated, I
have written my solutions in Haskell, and I find these puzzles a great way to
keep practicing with Haskell and to learn new things about it; I don't
generally get much chance to use Haskell in my day-to-day work, so it's nice to
get an opportunity to work with this delightful language.

## Daily challenges

### Day 1

Traditionally, Advent of Code problems start out easy, slowly become more
difficult, peak in difficulty a few days before Christmas, and then become a
little less time-consuming towards the end. This year's puzzles mostly (but not
entirely) follow the same pattern, and as a result day 1 was fairly
straight-forward. Similarly to the first challenges of 2019 and 2020, day 1 of
this year's Advent of Code consisted of a pairwise analysis of sequential data
points. To solve the first part of the problem, find the sequential pairs in
the data, and count the number of pairs in which the second element is larger
than the first. Interestingly, the second part is the same problem, just with a
pre-processing step; find all triplets and compute the sum of their elements,
then repeat the same method that we applied for the first part.

```haskell
solution :: Day
solution = (
        o . r,
        o . map (\(a, b, c) -> a + b + c) . triples . r
    )
    where
        r = map read . lines
        o = show . length . filter (< 0) . map (uncurry (-)) . pairs
```

### Day 2

The second challenge of this year falls into the recurring category of
numerical integration problems, where some object has a position and a speed,
and the task is to integrate these values in one way or another. The second
part is essentially the same problem, but with slightly more variables. Both
parts can be solved relatively easily with a folding operation.

### Day 3

Both parts of this challenge are fairly simple analyse-and-filter problems, for
the lack of a better word. That is to say, you compute some property of a set
of data points, and then eliminate all elements of the dataset which do not
satisfy some predicate that depends on that property, until you are left with a
single remaining datum. Not a profoundly interesting problem by any means, but
a good way for newer programmers to become acquainted with the idea of
filtering data.

### Day 4

If you squint your eyes and look at this problem abstractly, it essentially
becomes the same problem as day 3: you start with a large number of data points
and repeatedly eliminate them based on some predicate. In this case, that
predicate boils down to the question whether there is a "bingo" on the board.
It would be interesting to see if one could develop a generalized solution that
solves both days 3 and 4, while abstracting away the boilerplate code. What
would such a solution look like?

### Day 5

Another mainstay of the Advent of Code puzzle arsenal is the line-drawing
puzzle: given some set of lines, find their intersections. This year, the line
drawing puzzle was somewhat simpler that in previous years (I am thinking of
the asteroid-shooting puzzle of yesteryear). For the first part, only
horizontal lines are considered, and the second part introduces diagonal lines.
Due to the relatively small size of the problem, I decided to solve this using
a multi-set; simply reduce each line to a set of discrete points that it
travels through, find the multi-set union of these sets, and find the elements
which exist more than once. Of course this becomes intractible if the lines
become too long (for example, if lines run across millions of points).

### Day 6

My goal with this blog post is by no means to criticize Eric -- it must be very
challenging to find 50 unique and interesting programming puzzles every year
--, but on the sixth day we find another common theme in Advent of code
puzzles: the first part of the problem is sufficiently small that a naive
approach provides a tractable solution, but the second part increases the scale
of the problem to such a degree that a naive solution will no longer provide a
solution in time for Christmas (or, in some cases, before the heat death of the
universe), and as such the programmer is forced so search for some more
computationally efficient solution. As a "veteran" of Advent of Code, you learn
to spot these problems quite early, and you may wish to look for efficient and
scalable solutions from the get-go.

Once again, multi-sets provide a very elegant solution to this problem. In
particular, the `concatMap` function allows us to turn a single element the map
into an arbitrary number of new elements. To solve the lanternfish puzzle in
this way, we simply map the number zero to the elements `[6, 8]`, and we map
all other numbers `n` to `n - 1`. This elegantly and efficiently captures the
growth pattern of the lanternfish. Because the multiset does not need to store
multiple copies of an element but can simply store how many copies of each
distinct element it has, this is also very spatially efficient.

```haskell
simulate :: MultiSet Integer -> MultiSet Integer
simulate = Data.MultiSet.concatMap f
    where f i = if i == 0 then [6, 8] else [i - 1]

readInput :: String -> MultiSet Integer
readInput = fromList . map read . splitOn ","

solution :: Day
solution = (
        show . size . (!! 80) . iterate simulate . readInput,
        show . size . (!! 256) . iterate simulate . readInput
    )
```

### Day 7

### Day 22

No modular arithmetic

```haskell
scale :: Grid2D Integer -> Grid2D Integer
scale g = unions
    [ mapKeys (\(x, y) -> (100 * nx + x, 100 * ny + y))
    . fmap (\x -> ((x - 1 + nx + ny) `mod` 9) + 1)
    $ g
    | nx <- [0..4]
    , ny <- [0..4]
    ]
```

### Day 23
